Our second use case is about biology.
Interactions arise naturally in biology.
Genes produce proteins, proteins regulate
the functions of other proteins,
cells transmit signals to other cells.
These functional genes lead to
pathological conditions that
present themselves as
observable phenotypes.
Some of these interactions that are
observed and measured by experiment lists.
Another class of graph relations
represent human knowledge.
For example, an edge may denote
an anatomical association, such as
the nucleuses inside a cell, part of
the cerebral cortex is part of the brain.
Similarly, one can encode different
classifications of entities like
both humans and dogs and mammals.
Researchers also find these
relationships from literature
or by computational techniques
like bioinformatics algorithms.
There are many bioinformatics algorithms
that find statistical correlations between
genes and proteins.
Many biological networks are created by
creating edges between entities because
they are strongly correlated based on
measurements like gene expression level.
Yet, a third category of
computed relationships
associates terms by mining
scientific literature.
If two entities are co-mentioned
in scientific articles very often,
then there is a likelihood that
these two entities are related.
In this case, the edge between them does
not depict a specific relationship, but
the fact they are associated.
All these interactions can be assembled
into networks of graphs where the nodes
are biological entities and
edges represent different categories of
molecular interactions,
associations between diseases and.
Now there are two issues I
would like you to understand.
First, graphs like the one
we saw are assembled.
That is, integrated from many data sources
produced by many independent science
groups who have different research goals,
use different scientific techniques,
but the underlying biological entities
are common across many groups.
It is the commonality that helps us
stitch together these logic graphs.
Second, as more results get linked and
integrated, the size of the networks grow,
leading to big data problems and
the need for big data technology.
Now let's ask the same question.
Why graphs?
In bio medicine people are always
trying to discover new science, for
instance, they want to discover
unknown relationships.
For example, they can take two diseases,
very different diseases, colorectal
cancer and Alzheimers disease, and
they might want to ask are they related?
If so, can you connect the dots and
find out what the intervening
network between them is?
It turns out, as you can see,
there are several genes that directly or
indirectly connect these two diseases.
Thus, we can use path finding techniques
like this to discover previously
unknown connections in a network.
In addition,
researchers sometimes think to explore the
networks to help their discovery process.
I have collaborated with a group that
is using graph exploration techniques
to figure out how phenotypes of
undiagnosed diseases all fit together.